---
layout: post
title: "[Motivations] Differential Geometry"
date: 2025-12-15
---

It's 1:17 AM, and I'm hungry. But I shouldn't eat before sleeping.

I have a differential geometry textbook-- the Do Carmo one. It briefly goes over
the motivations of diff geo.

Definition of a manifold -- roughly, something that you can do calculus on. Do
calculus on? What's calculus? Derivatives and integration. Derivatives and
integration on functions.

Derivatives -- at any point of the function, you can tell the direction that
it's headed and how fast it's heading that way. How fast? How fast is a
proportion -- the delta in the output over the delta of the input. The
derivative is a function so it can't return two different outputs for a given
input. So if you have a corner there are two valid "derivatives", one from each
side of the corner, which is not allowed here for some reason. Why can't we
define a derivative to return a set of values, depending on the direction of the
limit? Apparently it's not as nice. So we immediately discard anything with a
sharp edge from our study to make things nice. Why? What do we get for being
nice? Idk.

Integration -- measuring the area under the curve. Area under the curve. If you
were to plot the function on an x-y plane and look at how much area is under the
curve, that's the integral. Hmm. If you take the integral of a function that
reports the speed of a car, you get the distance the car traveled. If the car
stayed at a constant speed of 30 mph, the function looks like a flat line at 30.
Then multiply 30 (height) x time (width) to get the area under the curve.
Effectively you also multiplied miles/hour x hours to get miles. So an integral
is such -- if you imagine your function as the speed of your car, the integral
is the distance covered by your car. Hmm. I only have roundabout ways of
explaining what an integral is.

Somehow, the derivative and the integral are inverses of each other.

Somehow, you don't actually need to zoom into the function and take measurements
(actually that's impossible), but there are tricks for turning the function into
another function, and that function is actually the derivative.

You can do calculus on functions of multiple variables. In which case, instead
of a single number being the derivative at a point, you get a ... was it a
vector or a matrix (Jacobian) times a vector (direction vector) to get a vector?
Why do you need a Jacobian? If the multivariable functions get a Jacobian, which
takes as input the direction vector, why do the single variable functions get a
single number?

Hmm, I mean you can do calculus on multivariate functions. What's the difference
between multivariable calculus and differential geometry?

Why can't the derivative of a single valued function just give a pair [left
limit, right limit]? Apparently this is allowed in non-smooth analysis.
Effectively what we've done is said -- give me the derivative of this single
valued function if we go in the left/right direction. Isn't that exactly what
the Jacobian is then? Why don't we get non-smoothness for free in the
multivariable case then? Supposedly it's because we can get infinite
non-smoothness-- I don't really get that. But it has to do with the fact that in
one dimension, we have two directions we can go (left or right). But in two
dimensions, we have an uncountably infinite amount of directions we can go (x
amount of degrees as a real number). What are cases in between, where we have
more than two but a finite amount of directions, or a countably infinite amount
of directions?
